MY DESKTOP
Your chance to show the world your desktop or PC. Email your screenshots and photos to: misc@fullcirclemagazine.org and include a brief paragraph about your desktop, your PC's specs and any other interesting tidbits about your setup.

I've Used Ubuntu since version 6.06. Great OS. I’m still learning all about Linux and especially Ubuntu. 

Now I use version 10.04 on my laptop.

Toshiba Satellite A305SD
AMD Turion 64 Dual Core Mobile (but I use Ubuntu 32-bit).
4 GB 800 Mhz RAM
ATI  3200 Graphics Card.
I've used Screenlets and CairoDock for Task Bar, and Marvel Comic Desktop Background.

Jorge Rozo
I have been using Ubuntu since Hardy. I love tweaking my desktop to maximize screen size; I use the most common applications available for web browsing, file sharing, photo editing, social networking and communicating.

This was taken on an HP Pavilion dv3t notebook running Ubuntu 10.10. It has an Intel Core 2 Duo and 4GB of RAM. I'm a big fan of the notebook brand so I used one of HP's wallpapers. AWN dock is my launcher with Faenza Variant Cupertino icons.

This design makes use of all the vertical and horizontal screen space. The icons are Chromium, Mozilla Firefox 4 beta, Liferea, Skype, Gwibber, Pidgin, Virtualbox, and Rhythmbox.

Jean Austin Rodriguez
I'm a 20-year-old Italian boy who started using Ubuntu with 10.04 (yes, I'm a beginner). My desktop is really simple but I like it; I first installed the DarkRoom theme which was brown, and changed it using dark colours. The icons are Faenza, from gnome-look.org, they remind me of iOS.

Now I'm using Maverick on my 8-year-old desktop PC with:
- Intel Pentium4 @ 2.53GHz
- 512mb of Ram
- Nvidia GeForce4 mmx440 with 128mb of memory
- 14" Samsung Monitor 1024x768
- DVD player
All works perfectly from the beginning, except the graphic card, but I'm planning to solve the problem some day.

Rosario Lombardo
I've been using Ubuntu since 6.06, and now I'm using Ubuntu 10.10 on my new machine. My desktop may look a little bit weird.

First, the panel: I don't like the default menu and task list, so I made it like this. I really like the idea. Second, I'm using AWN to hold the launchers and task list; I put it on the right side as I found that this way best suits my wide-screen monitor, and the Intellihide of AWN also works well. Third, I didn't put many widgets on my desktop, as I don't really look at the desktop. The wallpapers are from a default set in Ubuntu, there are about 20 looping periodically.

At last, the terminal, that's guake, I hide almost everything except the terminal (of course) I have included this because I look at it much more than my desktop :)

Lu
