UBUNTU WOMEN
Written by Elizabeth Krumbach
Leadership

This summer, the Ubuntu Women team held the annual election for project leaders. Among them are newcomers Cheri Francis and Jessica Ledbetter, and leadership incumbent Elizabeth Krumbach. We asked these leaders about their work so far, and their goals for the Ubuntu Women project.

Cheri Francis

Ubuntu-Women was one of the first Ubuntu related IRC rooms that I braved as a new user. From that moment on, the people there have been an amazing support, and just good people. I have been trying to find ways to “give back” to the project, and I really hope that, as one of the leaders, I can do so. I have been working in my LoCo to encourage participation, and making the group welcoming to new users and contributors. I fully believe in the community aspect of Ubuntu, and have seen that manifested in many ways since I’ve been a part of it.

Cheri’s Goals for Ubuntu Women:

Career Days project: have a “day in the life” series of sessions, talking about various IT jobs and what some of our members do in “real life”.
Publicity: raising visibility of the project, helping people on other projects realize that small adjustments can make things more welcoming to everyone (including women).
LoCo Outreach: expand on our “best practices” list, and be a resource for LoCos that are interested in welcoming everyone and helping them feel comfortable.


Elizabeth Krumbach:

I have been an active member of the Ubuntu Women project since 2006 - working on all portions of the project including: Holding foundership of IRC channel, and maintaining the access list, launchpad admin, website admin, wiki admin, heading up monthly team reporting. I have been involved with organizing our Full Circle Magazine Ubuntu Women series and interviews series, the mentoring program, conference resource development, courses, and collaboration with Ubuntu Classroom, and have had the opportunity for in-person presence at Ubuntu Developers Summits (Lucid, Maverick, Oneiric) regarding the project, and will be attending the next UDS for the LTS release next year.

Elizabeth’s Goals for Ubuntu Women:

Our website is the first resource people see for the team, and the theme is very out-dated. We’ll be continuing to work toward getting the new theme in place so we can get it published before the end of the year.

The mentoring program we have now is very casual - with people joining the team and members of the team connecting them with people and resources within the Ubuntu project. I’d love to see us making more progress on a formalization of the process so we can get more feedback and learn how we can improve our program.

Jessica Ledbetter:

Currently, I'm a web developer and designer who creates applications in Java, Python, and Ruby. In addition to full-time development for a company, I am also a developer on Peer 2 Peer University (http://p2pu.org/). I've been using Linux for years, and Ubuntu for more than a few cycles.

The Ubuntu Women Project was one of the first IRC channels on freenode that I joined. It was a great environment to learn more about the Ubuntu project as a whole, and to find ways to get involved. Everyone was very welcoming and helpful back then, and continue to be that way today. Through the UW members, I’ve seen people encouraged to contribute to leading classroom sessions, contributing to coding projects, speaking at conferences, building one’s own business, and more. It’s a very supportive place for everyone.

Jessica’s Goals for Ubuntu Women:

Publicity: Getting the word out about the team and team members' accomplishments, and collaborating/helping other groups to be more welcoming.
Mentoring: Help find ways to increase the team and team members' accomplishments by improving the mentorship program.


