Linux Mint 11 Debian Edition

The [Mint] team is proud to announce the release of LMDE 201108 RC with updated ISOs for Gnome and Xfce.

Highlights
• All Linux Mint 11 features
• Installer improvements (keyboard variants, locale, bug fixes, UUID in fstab)
• Update Packs, dedicated Update Manager and staged repositories
• GTK2/GTK3 theme compatibility
• Updated software and packages

Linux Mint Debian Edition (LMDE) is a rolling distribution based on Debian Testing.

It’s available in both 32 and 64-bit as a live DVD with Gnome or Xfce.
The purpose of LMDE is to look identical to the main edition and to provide the same functionality while using Debian as a base.

Source: blog.linuxmint.com


Ubuntu One Hits 1 Million Users

Fresh off the back of our super successful Android Files app launch, we now get to share even more exciting news. Back in May we surpassed the 1 million global user mark! This is a significant milestone for us at Ubuntu One.

We’re passionate about building great Ubuntu One services and seeing how people love using them, so we’d like to say a big thank you to all our loyal users for supporting Ubuntu One. As such,  we have made some changes to our plans. From today, Ubuntu One Basic will become Ubuntu One Free and users will get 5GB of free storage when they set up an account. Current  users of Ubuntu One Basic will see their free storage allowance automatically increase from 2GB to 5GB.

Source: ubuntulook.com


Arch Linux Moves Up To Linux 3.0

The Arch Linux team has released the first new all-in-one update for its minimalist, rolling-release distribution in 15 months. The Arch Linux 2011.08.19 installation media features support for Linux 3.0 and the syslinux bootloader, and offers experimental Btrfs and NILFS2 file-systems, and more flexible source-file selection.

Arch Linux is a rolling-release distro (as is Gentoo), making packages available to the distribution shortly after they are released upstream. Since Arch Linux doesn't draw attention to itself with release announcements, it's easy to forget about it.

Source: desktoplinux.com


Ubuntu One Hits 1 Million Users

Fresh off the back of our super successful Android Files app launch, we now get to share even more exciting news. Back in May we surpassed the 1 million global user mark! This is a significant milestone for us at Ubuntu One.

We’re passionate about building great Ubuntu One services and seeing how people love using them, so we’d like to say a big thank you to all our loyal users for supporting Ubuntu One. As such,  we have made some changes to our plans. From today, Ubuntu One Basic will become Ubuntu One Free and users will get 5GB of free storage when they set up an account. Current  users of Ubuntu One Basic will see their free storage allowance automatically increase from 2GB to 5GB.

Source: ubuntulook.com
