One of the challenges facing non-profit organizations, specifically in the United States, involves how best to allocate resources donated to the organization in support of its mission. The economic turbulence felt around the world continues to test the resolve of those whose responsibility it is to continue offering services and support in the face of declining donations. Organizations desire to be on the cutting edge of technology, but also understand and embrace the challenges to operate up to a level acceptable to their donors and patrons.

In 2003, the people at the church I attend found themselves facing a major financial decision following the demise of their server, that ran Windows NT 3.51 for the last 10 years. The Board understood the financial ramifications of installing new Windows Server software, and the client access licenses (CALs) required to maintain current connectivity and productivity. Fortunately, I seized an opportunity to suggest an alternative in using Ubuntu as a replacement. Our server requirements seemed simple enough; with my desktop experience on Ubuntu for a couple of years prior, I knew Ubuntu would support our needs well into the future. While we certainly lacked expertise in administering a Linux server, a couple of volunteers demonstrated a working knowledge of Ubuntu and the desire to learn more (including myself). After presenting the adverse financial impact of securing 20 CALs and the server OS from Microsoft, and then praising the power and capabilities of Ubuntu at a zero-cost basis, they expressed skepticism, but eventually agreed to it.

Over the course of a month, I worked to construct an Ubuntu server, and replicated all the shares from the old system under the Samba application, and even set up sizable home directories where users could back up private data from their desktop. After overcoming a few obstacles in integrating both Mac and PC-based client operating systems, the Ubuntu server went live. It has been running ever since.

Through the use of WebMin, we administer this server through a GUI interface to accomplish all our needs, from adding users, modifying group membership, to adding and monitoring hardware. We even set up early warning systems through WebMin to alert us if file space becomes an issue, or if a particular service stops working. We've NEVER had a virus propagate through the server to any clients. While we experience our share of virus-infected clients (don't click on those email links!!), the virus's vector never involves the Ubuntu server. We even experienced a major power surge in 2010 that destroyed computer and networking systems, including the server containing our financial application, but Ubuntu quickly came back to life following the restoration of power to the facility. We aggressively use this server without the concern of violating any end-user license agreements. We haven't even taken the time to upgrade to the latest “long term support” version! We're still running Ubuntu Hardy Heron 8.04! Someday, we'll upgrade, but the urgency is simply not there because we stay on top of our patches and updates for this version, and the system continues to run flawlessly. To say the installation and implementation of Ubuntu was (and still is) a smashing success is a complete understatement. 

My hope is that anyone needing controlled network connectivity in any size organization would seriously consider giving Ubuntu a try. The learning curve for an administrator is very small due to the plethora of tools available, such as the aforementioned WebMin, and the many online forums outlining common problems and solutions. I am convinced Ubuntu is no longer a hobbyist operating system. It is a mainstream operating system providing server class capabilities at no cost to the organization.
