I THINK
Last month's question was:
With the rise of web-based email, do we really need an email client installed by default?

With the rise of web-based email, do we really need an email client installed by default?

Yes			266	57%
No			179	38%
Don't know	21	5%

Do you use web-based email? If so, which one.

Why keep emails on a computer when there is the cloud? GMail lets me import my mail from other servers, why should I not use it? Moreover, I can access the same email on my laptop, on my mom`s pc, on my phone or tablet.

I use both web based and computer based email clients. I see the need for both.

I don't want my business email to be hostage to web-based storage. I want to keep my own records.

In my personal experience, since I'm using GMail, I have never run Evolution again on my Ubuntu System.

Web-based email is slow and not comfortable.

People aren't ready for it not to be included -- yet.

Yes we need to download and store emails for offline use.

I have not used an email client for over 5 years. Web-based works just fine.

I use Hotmail, and have my Gmail accounts downloaded into Thunderbird. I prefer the client, so I can tailor how I view the emails.

Since I have various e-mail adresses, Evolution is important.

Not being able to remove Evolution has bugged me for ages.

Only used to use email client to notify me of mail, but now use Google Mail Checker in Opera, so no need for client now.

Mixed opinion. Essential - No. But if it is necessary to have full integration, then yes. I find that I am more and more impressed with Thunderbird every day. Still, it is not essential for default installation.

An email client is useful to access these emails in case of unavailability of Internet connection.

I do use GMail, but through Thunderbird... So yes, I am using an e-mail client, but personally, I don't really need it by default, as I can easily install it myself. I would just like to have better integration with Thunderbird once I install it.

I want MY data (including emails) on MY computer. Do not want to hear about this "cloud" thing.

Webmail = low security, to me.


With the rise of web-based email, we need an email client which merges each email account into a single piece of software.

I sometimes use Thunderbird but would like all that Evolution stuff to go away


The question I'd like to pose for FCM#54 is:

What age do you think the average Linux user is?

To give your answer, go to: http://goo.gl/AB1nX


Quick How-To : Broadcom Wireless
by Eric Skala

When you install, or upgrade to, Ubuntu 11.04 you may notice that you can not use your Broadcom Wireless adapter. Many people have left Ubuntu and/or Linux for this reason. Yes, you can look online for a way to install the driver, but I'm going to show you how to quickly install the driver. The way I'm going to show you works in all Ubuntu derivatives.

First, open a Terminal, and enter:

sudo apt-get firmware-b43-installer

It will ask you for your password which you should enter. When the program has been successfully installed go back to your terminal and type in:

sudo apt-get install b43-fwcutter

Again, typing in your password.

If you don’t wont to use the terminal you can open your package manager and search for bcm. Make sure you uninstall the bcmw1-kernal-source package. Search for firmware-b43-installer and install it, then search for b43-fwcutter and install that. Your wireless should now work. I used the steps above to also get the wireless on my Dell Inspiron 1200 laptop to work. Remember, you need to have a wired network connection to do the steps above!

